Now we will take a look at
the different types of shells.
There are several different
shells in Linux.
Some of the most popular ones are
Bourne shell,
developed in the 1970s for
Unix and still in use today.
C shell,
Korn shell,
Z shell
and the Bourne-again shell,
which is often called as Bash.
These shells may differ in different
ways in their core capabilities,
but all of them have
one common purpose,
to facilitate the communication between the user
and the operating system.
To check the shell being used,
use the command echo $SHELL
with uppercase letters
for the word shell.
Bob checks this in his own system
and sees that his default shell
is the Bash shell.
Bash is perhaps the most
popular shell,
specifically because of its features
such as Bash completions
or brace expansion,
which is not available in shells
such as the Bourne shell.
To change the default shell,
use the command chsh.
You will be prompted for
the password and following that,
the new value of the shell.
You will have to log into
a new terminal session
to see this change, though.
Let us now take a quick look
at the features of the Bash shell.
Bash supports command
auto-completion.
What this means is,
Bash will attempt to auto-complete
commands for you
if you type a part of it
and press the tab key.
This feature can extend to completing
a file or a directory name,
commands, its arguments and options.
This is very handy,
especially when navigating
through the Linux system.
You do not have to remember
or type in the entire name of
directories or files,
just type in the first few
characters of a file or directory
and use tab space to take advantage
of the auto-complete feature.
In Bash, we can set custom aliases
for the actual commands.
In this example,
we are setting an alias called "DT"
to the command called date,
which as the name suggests
prints the current date.
Once the alias is set,
you can type the dt command
every time you want to print the date.
Use the history command to get
a list of previously run commands.
This is quite useful
to revisit and check some of
the commands you ran earlier.
Do you remember how to check
the shell you are using?
"That was already explained,"
Bob thinks.
We have to type in echo $SHELL,
but what is $SHELL?
It is a variable and to be
more specific,
it is an environment variable.
Variables just as in any
programming language
are used to store information.
In this example,
the word SHELL in uppercase
represents an environmental variable,
which stores the value of
the type of shell used
by the user
to print the variable value.
We proceed the variable name
with a $ symbol.
We will learn more about variables
in the second and final chapter
of this quick-start guide.
Environment variables in specific,
store information about
the user's login session,
which is used by the shell
when executing commands.
To see a list of
all environment variables,
use the env command.
To set an environment variable,
we can use the export command.
Say you want to create
a new environment variable
called office
and set a value of caleston to it.
Use the export command
and in the argument,
use office = caleston.
This will set the variable for
the current shell
and any other processes or
programs started by the shell.
You can also assign the variable
without the export command
like this.
However, this will only apply
the variable within the shell.
The value is not carried forward
to any other process.
To make these variables persistent
over subsequent login or reboots,
add them to the dot profile or
dot pam underscore environment file
in the user's home directory.
Bob prints out all
the environment variables
using the env command
and also tries to print them
individually
by using the echo command,
followed by $
variable name as the argument.
He checks the log name
and sees that it is set to Bob.
Speaking about the environment
variables,
when a user issues an external
command into the shell,
the shell uses a path variable
to search for these external
commands.
To see the directories defined
in the path variable,
use the command echo $ path.
Bob tries it
and sees a really long list of
directories in his path.
If the path variable does not
have the location of
a command or a program defined,
running a command by
itself will result in a failure.
To check if the location of
a command can be identified,
use the which command.
In this example,
we are checking the example of
a video editing program
called OBS Studio.
As you can see,
this command did not provide
a location.
Running this command results
in an error
"command not found."
This is because the path to
this program
is not defined in the path variable.
To add it,
we can use the export command again.
Run the command
export PATH=$PATH
and append the path of the OBS
Studio using the colon as separator.
In this example,
the path to OBS Studio
is /opt/OBS/bin.
Once this is done,
we can check that the path is
set by using the which command again.
We are coming to the end of
chapter one. I
n this final part, we will customize
the Bash prompt.
Bob reads further.
Once you are logged
into the Bash shell,
the line you see is called
the Bash prompt.
This can provide meaningful
information about the logged in user,
name of the system
and the location on the system.
Right now it's only showing
the current working directory
for the user.
This can, however, be customized to
show what you need to see.
For example,
it can be customized to show
the username and the host name.
This is especially helpful
when a user is logged into
multiple systems
through multiple terminals.
It lets you know which host
you are on,
so you are sure you are working on
the right server.
The Bash prompt is set
and controlled by a set of
special shell environment variables.
The most common of these variables
and the one we will focus on
is the PS1 variable.
To see the value assigned to PS1,
type echo $PS1.
Here, the value \W
represents the current
working directory.
The $ symbol following that
is a symbol for the user prompt.
The document gives handy tips on
how to customize the Bash prompt.
Let us now look at ways to
customize the prompt
by updating PS1 variable.
Bash displays the primary prompt
PS1 when it is ready to
read a command.
Let's now change the prompt
to only display the word
Ubuntu server.
In this example,
we are changing the value of
PS1 to Ubuntu server,
followed by a colon.
Once this command is run,
the prompt should immediately change.
These can be customized further
by inserting a number of
backslash escape
special characters.
Let's now use some of
these characters
to customize our prompt further.
Making use of the \d \t \u,
we can print the date,
time and username before
the @ symbol.
Following this, using the \h and \w,
we can print the host name
and the present working
directory of the user.
This is followed by the $ symbol,
indicating that it is a regular user.
Check out the reference section
for the complete list
of these special characters
that may be used
to customize the Bash prompt.
This ends the chapter one of
the quick-start guide.
Bob sees that there is another
hands-on lab following the chapter
and remembers Andrew's words
to complete them by the next day.
Head over to the hands-on lab
to play around with the Bash shell.